(ON CUE)
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
home of the world's greatest musical
events ------- the Bell Telephone System brings
you another program in the award-winning
series. The New York Philharmonic Young
People's Concerts under the musical
direction of Leonard Bernstein.
And here is Mr. Bernstein
You
probably all know what that exciting
little piece was - the Russian Sailors' Dance from the ballet "The Red Poppy" by Gliere. But even if you didn't
know it by name, I'11 bet you must have recognized
it as Russian music. And that's because
it is so full of Russian folk - flavor -- folk
melody, folk rhythm, folk spirit. In other words, it's
what is called nationalistic music -
that is, music that reflects the nature or spirit of a
particular nation, whether that nation be
Russia, or France, or Peru, or the Navajo
Indian Tribe. For instance, if we play
this bit of music, you'11 immediately know it's - what?
What is it?
Or this one?
What is that?
Well, anyway, that's the way music used to
be, neatly packaged with clear
nationalistic labels, and tied with
colorful native ribbons. But
these days it's a whole other
story. Especially since the last world
war. The most recent music has been
getting more and more international: in
other words, it's getting harder all the
time to spot what country a really
modern piece comes from. For instance, see
if you can tell the national origin of
this:
Any suggestions:
No one brave enough to try?
OK - It's
German;
that was
a complete piece, amazingly enough, by the famous and very
influential composer Anton von
Webern, written in the year 1923.
Now, did you hear anything particularly
German about that music? Probably not.
Now, here's another bit of music in
the same style. See if you have any
better luck with it.
Does that begin to sound any more German
to you?
Well, if it does,
there's something wrong, because what we
just played is not German at all, but a
piece by a modern Japanese composer
named Mayazumi. Now how about that? If I
hadn't told you that second piece of
music was by a Japanese, you'd never have
known it wasn't still the first German piece, would you have?
Or at least you wouldn't have known that we'd jumped 8,000 miles
from Germany to Japan, and the music hasn't
changed at all. So something
strange is going on these days, isn't it?
Perhaps music is finally becoming what
so many people have liked to call
it: a universal language. Now, just for fun,
listen to this bit of music, written only
_________years ago, and see if you can tell what
country it's from:
Same problem again. It could
be by a German, or a Japanese,
but it happens to be by a gifted American
named Milton Babbitt.
*And here are a few bars by a young Italian
composer named Nono.
Again, that doesn't sound any more
Italian than the Japanese piece did, does it?*
Now, I don't want you to
get the idea that all new music sounds
like this, or is all influenced by Webern.
It's just that the general trend these
days - the mainstream, you might say - is in this direction of an
international style. And I'm not saying that
this is either good or bad; it's just a
fact of history. With the world becoming
smaller all the time, with news and
fashions jumping over oceans in a matter
of minutes and seconds, with any spot
on the globe just a few hours away by
air from any other spot - it's no wonder
that the world's music is becoming more
and more alike. But there are lots of
people who think that this is a pity;
and who long for the days
when German music sounded German,
when Japanese music sounded Japanese,
and American music could always be spotted by its
jazziness. Well, gone are the days. Now, I
don't want you to fall into the other
trap of thinking that all old music was
nationalistic, any more than I want you
to think all new music isn't. Up to
(CROSS TO PIANO)
the 19th century, most music was more or
less international in sound.
For instance, this music is by
Bach
And this is by Vivaldi
Now even a musical expert
would find it difficult to tell
which was German and which Italian.
But once we
come to the 19th century - ah, there's
another story. There are two things that make the 19th century different:	one is that those hundred
years, from 1800 to 1900, were the time of
the most tremendous nationalistic
spirit in Europe; and second,
that most of the music we hear
in our concert halls today was written
somewhere in that period. So,
if you put those two facts together, you
get a third fact: that most of
the music we still listen to today
is born of that fiery
nationalistic feeling.
SKIPPED
And that's why we still tend to lump music together according to nationality - French, German, Russian, American, and so on.
Just think of some of the
best-known pieces of music:
the prelude to Wagner's opera "Die
Meistersinger."
(PLAY)
Why that has 'Germany' written all over it:
ponderous, earnest, well-nourished.
And the same thing is true of
almost all the countries of Europe
in the 19th century. This
nationalist fever caught on like wild-fire.
Out of Poland came Chopin, with
his Polonaise and Mazurkas:
(Play)
What else can that music be but Polish? And out of Itlay
came a whole slew of marvelous operas, which are still today
the mainstay of our opera houses.
Rigoletto - Tosca - Pagliacci - Traviata:
(PlAY SEMPRE LIBERA)
What can be more Italian than that?
And then,
of course, Russia, which was
bursting with nationalistic composers
all through the 19th century: Glinka,
Borodin, Moussorgsky, Chaikovsky -
(PLAY CHAIKOVSKY # 4)
No two ways about that:	it's Russian music.
So, in the same
way, there were Albeniz and Granados from
Spain, being very Spanish indeed; and
in Czechoslovakia (or Bohemia, as
it was then known), there appeared Dvorak and
Smetana, both fierce nationalists; out
of Norway came Grieg, out of Finland,
Sibelius, out of Hungary,
Liszt, and so on. Even our own
America, which was born late and took a
long time to get going musically, had its
own 19th century nationalists:
MacDowell with his Indian suites;
Henry Gilbert with his Negro and Creole
Dances. And let's not forget
Ernest Schelling, the original founder
of these Young People's
Concerts. He died twenty-five years ago this
month; and we honor him for the
great work he did with his concerts for
children, as well as for the proudly
American nationalism of the music he
wrote. But the greatest American
nationalist of the time was certainly
that strange and salty New Englander,
Charles Ives, whose
wildly original music has only recently
begun to be known and appreciated. Ives
was a part-time composer; he
sold insurance for a living, and composed
nights and on weekends;
but somehow, in his half-amateur inspired
way, he was able to produce music that
was not only full of nationalistic
American flavor, but that also
predicted many of the new, startling
sounds that were later to become
everyday stuff in what we now call
'modern' music. Ives was a pioneer, a
prophet, and a patriot - a real
old-fashioned American individualist,
like Emerson and Thoreau. We are
going to play one of his
strangest compositions, a very
American piece called the "Fourth
of July." In this amazing piece, we will be
able to hear the whole story of Charles
Ives: his amazing invention
of new sounds, bold harmonies, and
mad orchestration; and also his
great fascination with popular American
tunes. In this short
piece we can hear snatches of more than
half-a-dozen such ditties, ranging from
the bugle-call 'Reveille' to 'Yankee Doodle' -
and all mixed up together in sort of
dream-like far-out harmony. For it is a
dream, this 'Fourth of July', as Ives tells us in his foreword to the score -- a boy's dream of
that most exciting of all boys' holidays.
It is a dream in which sky-rockets are mixed up with
marching bands, hymn-tunes, staying up
late, and eating too much picnic food. And
so all the familiar tunes come out
slightly twisted, a little bit wrong, as
they might be in a dream of long ago.
For instance, at one wild, climactic moment,
the flutes are playing their
version of 'Glory, Glory, Hallelujah'.
At the same time a cornet is blaring
the first part, 'Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory'
While the trumpets try to top the others with 'Columbia,
the Gem of the Ocean'
Now that's not just dream-like; it's
probably the way the local band actually
sounded when Ives
was a boy in the small town of
Redding, Connecticut.
And that's also a part of his boyhood dream.
But that's not all: at the same time,
other people are trying to get
through with 'Yankee Doodle'
Now all those tunes go
together, somehow, tossed around in a feverish
memory of drums, fireworks, and church-
bells:
What a dream! Almost a nightmare.
SKIPPED
That's nationalistic music at its most original. It's hard to believe that this music was written way back in 1912!
And to make it all even more peculiar and dream-like,
Ives recalls for us the special
sound of two bands playing at once. I'm
sure you've all had that experience,
during a parade, of hearing one band
approach as another disappears,
in two different rhythms.
Well, Ives actually makes this happen in
the music, by splitting up the orchestra
every once in a while into two
orchestras; and for those moments we need
two conductors to keep track
of what's going on. So don't be surprised
if now and again you find our assistant
conductor, ___________________________, suddenly
standing up and conducting away in a
whole other beat.
So here is the 'Fourth of July' by Charles Ives, - a piece that begins in
the wispy shadows of a dream,
gradually builds up by adding one tune on top of
another, - marches, hymns,
bells, fireworks -
until the whole orchestra arrives
at one final dissonant shriek,
and then suddenly peters out in a few wispy
dream-like notes, and it's all over, like waking up.
You may not even realize this piece is
over, it's so strange and sudden;
so if you don't applaud,
we'll understand.
That extraordinary piece by Charles
Ives was part of a
tremendous movement in our country
to compose American sounding music.
And this movement reached its peak in
our own century with Gershwin, who
used jazz as the main nationalistic
element,
and with Aaron Copland,
who used cowboy tunes and folk songs.
But by
the 1940's, the movement was over, not only
in America, but all over the world.
The last of the great nationalists in Germany
was Hindemith;
in Bohemia,
Mahler; in
Spain, de Falla;
in Hungary,
Bartok - and they're all dead now. Even those
great nationalistic composers who are
still living are not being very
nationalistic anymore, like the Russian
Stravinsky, and the American Copland.
So, you see, times have changed;
we're living in an international
world. There are people who are
convinced that a new period of
nationalism is coming, especially in the
music of the newer nations like Israel,
and the newly-emerging
countries of Africa and Asia.
It's possible, but at the moment we're still
waiting. These days, audiences who
love music of a
nationalistic kind have to cast a
fond look backwards to the last century
in order to satisfy their nostalgia. And so,
for those people - and there are lots of them - we're going to spend the rest of
this hour playing two choice favorites
from the good old days of nationalistic
music. Our first stop on this sentimental
journey
is Spain, and the music of Manuel de Falla.
We're going to hear a suite from
his famous ballet 'The
Three Cornered Hat'- a light delightful work
full of Spanish fandangos and flamenco
spirit.
The moment you hear a rhythm like this
(PLAY)
you know you're in Spain.
Or a flamenco phrase like
this
(PLAY)
- or a dance tune like this
These are the
Spanish materials out of which de Falla
weaves his colorful, nationalistic
tapestry. Here are scenes and dances from
Part One of de Falla's ballet, 'The
Three Cornered Hat'.
MATT:	DE FALLA TITLE CARD
We're going to end our program on
nationalism by playing for you in its
entirety perhaps the most famous of all
nationalistic tone-poems, 'The Moldau,' by
the Bohemian composer Smetana.
Into this endearing and enduring piece,
Smetana has poured all the tenderness
and pride of his love of country, and has
produced this monument of patriotism
which celebrates his native land by
describing an imaginary journey down its
most majestic river, the Moldau. You see,
there are various ways in which a
composer can pay homage to his country.
Ives did it by a musical celebration of
the Fourth of July, a great national holiday.
De Falla did it by fashioning a
large, beautiful ballet out of the folk-
songs and dances of his country.
And now Smetana does it by celebrating
the natural beauties of his country.
I'm sure you've heard enough about this
piece to follow it
without my giving you a road map:
the waves, the hunting
scene, the wedding scene, the moonlight
scene, the stormy rapids, and so on. You'll
recognize them all as you drift happily
down Smetana's river; and as you drift,
you should feel a warm, romantic glow
from the nationalism that used to be.
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center....
the season's second New York
Philharmonic Young People's Concert with
Leonard Bernstein has presented a
program titled "Farewell to Nationalism"...
featuring the Russian Sailors' Dance by
Gliere, the First Suite of Manual
de Falla's "Three Cornered Hat," "Fourth of
July" by Charles Ives and a performance
of "The Moldau" by Smetana. This program
was recorded in Philharmonic Hall and
was produced and directed by Roger
Englander. The New York Philharmonic
Young People's Concerts are presented by
The Bell Telephone System. The next
program in this series will be seen in
nine weeks, on Thursday, January 28th, when
Mr. Bernstein will present "Young
Performers." Next week see the Bell
Telephone Hour on another network. Check
your local listings for time and station.